Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with audio Vivi from hibernating
rhinos. He's a C sharp
developer on the core team
working on a product called
Raven DB. Thanks for coming
on the show. Hi Scott.
Thank you. Yeah. So Raven
DB, what is that product?
Reverend DB is a no
SQL document database, which means
not only SQL database and
it refers to a different
model than we are used
to in tabular relational databases
of for most real problems,
a document that the best
can provide a better and
faster solutions document database is
you store your data in
Reverend DB in particular in
Jason format. And then you
can retrieve the information faster
and you are not restricted
to schema a schema, changes.
The database gives you more
flexibility in changing the information
and updating your data. And
this is a, this is
a full database though. It's
an acid database, right? It's
a fully asset database. So
you have, you know, it's
atomic, it's consistent. It's got
isolates, got durability. This, even
though it's not something that
maybe people are familiar with
a no SQL database, like
this can still be fully
transactional. Yeah. Raven DB is
transactional database and the safety
of the data is in
its highest priority. When we
store information and I'm talking
about each transaction separately, we
really keep the, the asset
properties in each of them.
When you store information, you
want it to, to be
there up to the point
that you, you know, shoot
your computer, unless you do
that, your information should be
there. I hope I don't
have to do that to
my, yeah. So how long
has this been a, been
a project? Well, this project,
eh, started back in 2008
as a windows only server
on.net, eh, and it got
matured. And today with dotnet
coal, we are actually a
cross-platform product. Well, it really,
you know, it, it, it,
wasn't easy to make it
cross platform because we had
to, eh, rewrite, eh, many
paths in this project. But
today we can say that
we are running, you know,
after eight years, more than
eight years, not only on
windows seven, also on Linux
and Mac. Yeah. And not
just Linux, but many, many
different Linuxes many distros. There
were a number of reasons
that you wanted to move
this over to dotnet core.
Weren't there. Yeah. We had
many driving reasons to do
that first, as we said,
the supporting various distros. And
now that we can say
that we are running a,
you know, also on Mac
and other devices and other
architectures, many architectures, eh, so
Raven DB can run on
any operating system supported by
darknet coal. Eh, this is
something great because the, the
development efforts that you, you
need to give for each
architecture and each new distro
is a lower than you
had to do previously Was,
was the hardest part moving
into dotnet core or was
there a bigger problem with
the different CPU architectures like
you had, you also wanted
to work to arm, You
know, walking in with the.net
core community gives you a
lot of benefits. You can,
you can get help on
the community when you have
problems, eh, especially, especially with
walking, you know, on different
architectures. And now when we
talking about the arm 32,
eh, which specifically the raspberry
PI is running on, yes,
we had a lot of
stability problems at first. And
I mean, you know, dotnet
coal was just released in
its better versions, but we
got a lot of help
on the community and we
followed follow the, the, the
progress. And, and we, you
know, w w we saw,
we saw, we saw ourselves
getting there one step at
a time. And finally, we
are there. The you've been
running on it on Linux
and done a core for
a year. And you said
that initially, when you were
working on beta versions of
the framework, you had some
stability issues. Yeah. At first,
the CLL, the host of.net,
the host process of.net, eh,
was not, eh, mature yet.
So we, we suffered the
stability issues and we, we,
you know, w we, we
didn't give up who we
tracked the, the announcement from
the core CLL team. And
when the declared the zero
failing test state on the
arm, 32 architecture, for example,
that was a, a signal,
you know, signal to us
to cross compile the CLR
and try Reverend DB on
the pie with few adjustments
and the correct, you know,
buys the system calls, modifications.
It worked. I remember, you
know, trying to do to
do that in a hot
summer day on the PI
and the officer condition got
broken in that very same
day. And I ended up
with two burned raspberry pies
in the end. So yeah,
we had, we had the
problems along the way, eh,
but we managed to fix
everything. And today, today we
ended up with a full
scale transactional database on 35
bucks, a raspberry pie, serving
thousands of requests per seconds,
and writing currently up to
2,500 documents per second, transactionally
on the pie that they
would say, w you know,
wouldn't shame an average production
server. How so, how, how
do you, What did you
want to put on the
pilot? Like, I think the
most amazing part about this
is it's, there's so many
amazing aspects of this from
a story perspective, right? This
is a, you know, an
eight year old or nine
year old product. It was
a leg it's a it's,
you could call it a
legacy code simply because it's
older, but it ran only
on windows, but it was
very well factored was very
well written. You moved it
to.net core that allowed you
to move it, to run
it on multiple distros. But
I think of a Raven
AB being more as a
cloud, kind of a database
or a big database that
would use on a big
company. Why was it important
for you to run it
on a pie? Just because
you could, Oh, well, we
first want to say yes,
we can, we can, you
know, run on any CPU
on any iOS on any
business, but also supporting customers,
customers with the low end
machines. It was on our
mind. There are a lot
of customers that are running
old machines and to upgrade,
you know, then tire system
could be costly and running
on 32 beats is something
that can be in their
interests. So this was a
real big motive to make
it work on a, on
a pie or on any
32 beat machine. And when
you did this though, because
gotten it core, didn't have
an official arm supported much
less an raspberry PI supported.
How much did this mean
that it was suddenly your
job to get dotnet core
running on arm? Well, actually
I was developing a and
C plus plus on Linux,
on Linux for about 10
years. And then I got
here and, you know, everything
was running on windows. It
was like, you know, moving
to another country for me.
And that I was brought
to you to, to make
it work on, on, on
Linux in general, and later
on, on the, the Paya
in particular. And, and I
can tell you that at
first, eh, when you looking
on this tiny card on
this tiny, eh, eh, credit
card size, the computer, you,
you say to yourself, it
will never, will never be
something that can be, you
know, in production. It's like
more like a hobby to
make it work, to make
revenue, to be walk on
it. And the huge scale
of Freeman DB was a
little bit, you know, frightened
at first. But, you know,
I started, I started to
try the, the, the simple
things at first am. And
as I said, when, when
the, the dotnet core team,
the, you know, they did
a great job with the
I'm 32, one day, they
said, okay, it can walk,
you know, the hello world
world a program can walk
on it. And I immediately
was pushing to, to see
if we can do the
more sophisticated stuff like writing,
writing the transactional writing transactions
in, in keeping the asset
properties. Now, in an example,
the FC FC call sinking
the data to the disk
is something very important in
transactional databases and overcoming that,
you know, to get a
better performance, we need to
make a few optimizations. The
optimization we did on the
raspberry PI eventually gives us
a more performance on Linux
in general, and also in
windows. By the way, I
can give you an example
of such an optimization, the
transaction merging, okay. When you
committed transaction, okay, you, you
would expect the client to
get a success, a response
in a reasonable short time
when the database is in
pressure of many requests, writing
a transaction on the disc
may take more time than
writing all of them in
merge in a sequential weight.
However, it might increase the
client response time latency. So
what we did is thinking
about this old process, like
a bus station where each
person stating sending in the
Bastow is a transaction. And
the arriving to the destination
is like a successful asset
transaction. So if let's say,
if there aren't many people
in the bus stop, it
will be better for the
bus to take only one
person and let the other
bus behind him take the
next one. However, if there
are a lot of people
let's feel the bus as
much as we can, but
one can ask, you know,
question like the first person
might wait for the bus
to be field more than
he would wait is the
first one, you know, who
got there. But the answer
is that he will get
to the destination faster because
he's field bus will not
have to wait in the
traffic jam of many buses
before him, where, you know,
with a single person in
each of them. So he
can enjoy a better football
performance by participating in this
merger as a whole and
gain a lower response latency
eventually. So I hope this
a bus example, a bus
stop example, eh, gives us
an idea about how we
made an optimization on the
pie and by that serving
more requests, more writings per
second, but keeping the transactional,
eh, manner intact. It's, it's
so interesting. It almost makes
you wonder if this is
like a best practice for
software in general, that we
should be testing on low
end Machines to make sure
we, we, we, we feel
what that mean. We really
feel what low end is
like for our software. And
then we used, you know,
if you make an optimization
on the low end machine,
you're, you know, you'll have
a great experience on a
high end machine. You just
happen to go really low
to a $35 computer. Yeah.
Yeah. And when we say
low end the machine, we
are not talking only about
the processing power. We're also
talking about a memory, an
example, it's using a much,
a, it gives you to
use a much less memory
in, on the PI. And
by trying to, eh, operate
with the, you know, max
performance on, eh, low memory,
eh, hardware, eh, gives you
later on, on, on windows
and on Linux, better performance
because of the way that
you handle your memory. In
example, at the points at
the, at the points that
matter and aspect of performance,
eh, we allocated native memory
and carefully reusing it and
freeing it like you would
do in C plus plus.
And, and in other places
where you can use the
garbage collector and save code,
we are enjoying these of
coding in C shop. So
if you look today on,
on Reverend DB project open,
you can see many parts
that handle the memory in
the code itself in the
code itself. And doesn't let
the framework do that for
you. So you can control
the, the, the, the amount
of memory that you use
each second. And you benefit
from eight 20. You run
on a big machine because
when you, when you have
to deal to deal with
memory garbage collecting all the
time, you can lose performance
on any machine. How does
a Raven DB, does it
put everything in memory, or
does it have a balance?
Like how does it tune?
Because not only, like you
say, there's slow CPU, there's
slow memory, there's also slow
disk access. You're managing memory
in some ways, yourself, native
memory. In some instances, you're
letting, letting the, the CA
the CLR manage the memory
for you, but then you
also have the disc access.
I assume that your databases
can be larger than the
size of available memory, right?
Much larger. So if you
have like a, can you
have a four gigabyte database
on a pie, and then
you'll do the right thing.
You, you write a More
than four gigabytes, a database
on 32 beats a system.
This is a very good
example of a challenge. We
faced on the pie. We
used to map memory mapped
files on 64 beats operating
systems. And now when you
deal with 32 beats, you
need to use different techniques
and to map, eh, only
Windows in the memory and
freed immediately and manage your,
your, your map windows and
in general, your memory. And
we, we, we could, we
could actually, w what we
did on the pie in
the end was importing the
entire stack overflow site that
has set into the pie.
Oh my God. Yeah. Index
seed. And also querying, you
know, the, the question and
answers and everything was done
on the pie on biggest
Deckard, but the, the, the
results were amazing. And it
was done in a reasonable
time. You would expect something
like that, you know, can,
can take a few days.
But it also, it was
a really, really fast, really.
I really enjoyed the spot.
It was like, you know,
the, the price in the
end of a walk Is
this, let me ask you
this. Do you have a,
how do you, how do
you target the pie? Do
you have cross cross compilation?
Do you have if deaths,
or are you actually using
the same DLLs you use
on windows and on Mac?
We, we are using the
same DLLs for our managed
manage the code. We have
also a native code, and
basically most of the, the,
the API APIs used for
Linux works on the pie.
Eh, of course there are
32 beats APS that we
need, the system calls that
we need to use, but
it starts, we had to
cross compile the.net and make
some adjustments, like you said,
with, if they've said to
the PI, but later on,
when we could ditch the,
if depths and the predecessor
defines, and I can say
really, really simple and short
modifications to the code, most
of, most of it is
now running, eh, eh, as
you would expect, cross-platform language
to run on different devices
and different business. This is
something in the us in
the point of view for
alpha developer and maintainer, a
great thing. Really great, really
easy. If you have continuous
integration and continuous deployment, do
you have a raspberry PI
that is involved in that
build process? So when someone
puts their code into Raven,
when they're one of the
core developers like you, is
that updating and being tested
on the raspberry PI as
well as all the other
distributions. Yeah. We have a
testing environment, automatic testing environment,
and we test windows 64
and 32 beats and Linux,
60 64 beats. And the
raspberry PI we have in
our server room, in a
cooled server room, in a
cooled room. It's important to,
to keep the pie. Cool.
I already ended up with
two burnt pies on a
hot August day. So yes,
we, we do test it.
We can find many problems
that you wouldn't find in
a faster machines. And I
really recommend to do that
in any project, you know,
trying to, to run your
tests and running your were
real world scenarios on a
low end machines. I want
to back up a little
bit and understand the core
CLR arm process, because at
the time that we're recording
this, we're recording this at
the end of March. And
then in April, this show
will come out. The, if
you want to get core
CLR running on a raspberry
PI, too, this is something
you have to kind of
do manually. There's no official
supported a thing. Are you
using public supported instructions, or
are you, is this because
of your expertise doing Solares
work, that's allowing you to
do this. At first, I
had to myself, I had
to do, to use different
skills, eh, to come cross
compile and, and make it
work with on a different
distros on Linux. But today
we're talking at the end
of March and the cl
the core CLR team managed
give, eh, a nightly built
of dotnet code on the
raspberry PI. So I think
in the near future, people
will be able just, you
know, to download a darknet
call on the PI and
run the, the programs. You
know, it's, it's, it's getting
easier and easier in each
day. You can feel from
a developer point of view,
you can feel that, eh,
with, eh, each day passing
the ease of use, eh,
of dotnet call, eh, you
know, almost, eh, is, is
easy as a running, you
know, on windows, previous.net 4.5.
So it almost seems impossible.
Doesn't it? They knew that
you all pulled this off.
Yeah. I must say the,
the day that We served
the first request on the
pie and we raised a
toast and we were very
happy because it was involving
a, a lot of challenges
along the way. I, I
think, but I can say,
I can say that you
don't have to today, you
don't have to dive into
the bits and bites of
Linux as you had to
do in previous years in
order to have your web,
your application walk in.net call.
This is something that actually
brings up a good question,
though. How do you debug
this? Yeah. In this part?
Well, I would want a
better debugging experience experience. So
Linux, as we have a
no in a windows today
with the visual studio, 2000,
2017, we can remotely debug
the Linux machine through SSH.
Also profiling is a, not
so easy as it on
windows. And this is a
challenge for the, for the
community in the near future
to achieve, eh, on the
pie. There is no real
way to, to debug and
profile, eh, your application to
date, eh, on, on the
32 beats currently, you need
to, to use different and
most sophisticated techniques in order
to solve programming problems, but
I'm sure it will be
changing in the near future
because the people, the people
in the different teams working
all the time in very
serious manner, and we're really
looking forward to the debug
options that will be open
to us on Linux. Do
you, are you able to
debug this from visual studio
remotely? You said? Yeah. Yeah.
On visual studio, 2017, the
new visual studio gives us,
said a possibility to debug
Linux on dotnet call remotely.
So you are sitting behind
your windows machine debugging, a
Linux machine dotnet core Linux
machine. And you're feeling, you
know, at home you're feeling,
you feel that there is
that you would when debugging
a windows application. Wow. So
it feels like any, any
headless machine that just happens
to be tiny and in
your pocket. Yeah. Yeah. Just
like that. Yes. So can
you explain just a little
bit briefly as we end
here, the relationship between the
Raven DB open source project
and the hibernating rhinos company,
I can use Raven BB
on my projects if I
want to. And then I
pay for support, right? He's
a, an open source project.
Currently we have on windows,
we have a, An option
to develop a developer for
free, and then you can
get their license and support.
May I, I think, eh,
when moving to the next
version, eh, on dotnet net,
this will be changed and
we'll be, we'll be more
like you, you will be
able to run a free
version of Previn DB. This
is something that, you know,
I, I leave to our
marketing department. I usually like
yeah. To, to touch the
bits and bytes under the
hood, Of course. Well, and
that's actually a good opportunity
for people to look at
the bits and bytes. You
can go to demo dot
Raven, db.net. It's a really,
really impressive online demo where
you can go and see
the C-sharp code. You can
put in the queries, hit,
run demo, and then see
the output directly from a
real, a real server. So
you can go to Raven
db.net or demo dot Raven
to.net. And again is not
an advertisement. This is not
something that they've paid for.
It's just a really great
open source project. That's turned
into a really great company.
So I was excited to
have ADI on the show
to talk to us. Thanks
so much for, for coming
on today. Thank you. Thank
you, Scott. This has been
another episode of Hansel minutes.
We'll see you again next
week.